
1. Synthetic medical notes 

 
Patient 1  
Hospitalization from 21.01.2020 to 29.01.2020 
Euro score 2: 8.1% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed an intraoperatively preserved left ventricular 
ejection fraction of 65%. Postoperatively, the intubated patient was transferred to the 
intensive care unit, with stable hemodynamics and without the need for catecholamines. The 
cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient could be easily 
extubated on the day of surgery, and subsequently, the gas exchange was always sufficient 
under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. The patient was able to be 
moved to the normal ward in good general condition and hemodynamically stable on 
23.01.2020. Postoperatively, the patient experienced numbness in digits III-V with radiation 
into the forearm, which is most likely due to positioning during surgery. As a result, the 
liability insurance was activated, and hand ergometry was performed. In addition, a 
neurological consultation was requested, which had the following result: Clinically, the 
symptoms reported and examined, with hypoesthesia on the ulnar side of the forearm and 
the ulnar side of the hand as well as slight weakness in making a fist, finger abduction, and 
to a lesser extent thumb abduction and flexion at the terminal phalanx, are most consistent 
with a mild brachial plexus lesion. Correspondingly, two days after the onset of symptoms, a 
normal finding of the neurographies of the distal sections of the affected nerves was seen. In 
particular, an ulnar or median nerve compression neuropathy could be excluded. The further 
postoperative course was unproblematic. The patient was able to enter further cardiac 
rehabilitation on 29.01.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 2 
Hospitalization from 01.03.2020 to 14.03.2020 
Euro score 2: 1.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed a preserved intraoperative left ventricular 
ejection fraction. Postoperatively clinical examination revealed a facial palsy and pronation in 
the arm/leg holding test on the left side. An acute demarcated infarct in the right medial 
frontal gyrus, sized approximately 3.5cm, could be confirmed by computed tomography. The 
patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently 
always sufficient under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. The patient 
was able to be moved to the normal ward in good general condition and hemodynamically 
stable on 04.03.2020. On the ward, on the fifth postoperative day, there was a deterioration 
in the general condition; the patient became hypotensive, tachycardic, and dyspneic, so an 
echocardiography was performed on suspicion of a pericardial effusion. A large pericardial 
effusion could be diagnosed, with signs of tamponade. Subsequently, a subxiphoid drainage 
was performed urgently. Postoperatively, atrial fibrillation occurred with spontaneous 
conversion to sinus rhythm after beta-blocker administration. On the seventh postoperative 
day, atrial fibrillation recurred with successful cardioversion to sinus rhythm. We were able to 
discharge the patient for further cardiac rehabilitation on 14.03.2020 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 



Patient 3  
Hospitalization from 07.05.2021 to 08.06.2021  
Euroscore 2: 4.2% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. During the wake-up attempt, a paralysis of the left leg was noticed, which persisted 
after extubation. CT scans revealed several ischemic CVIs in the cerebellar and right 
anterior circulation area as well as in the left middle cerebral artery territory. Clinically and 
neurologically, the patient became somnolent over time with weakness in the left arm and 
leg, which persisted during hospitalization. The patient could be easily extubated on the day 
of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient under low-dose 
oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. On the first postoperative morning, a 
significantly increased central venous pressure with unstable hemodynamics was noticed, so 
a transthoracic echocardiography was performed. It revealed a pericardial tamponade with 
compression of the right heart chambers, which led to the indication for rethoracotomy. The 
hematoma was evacuated, and the thorax initially remained open. With improving 
hemodynamics and no evidence of recurrent bleeding, the thorax was closed again on the 
sixth postoperative day. The patient was transferred to the cardiac surgery department on 
the 14th postoperative day. Intensive physiotherapy was carried out for analgesia and 
mobility enhancement. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and 
bilateral pleural effusions. In addition, a pleural puncture was performed on both sides. The 
patient underwent intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy, with slight neurological 
improvement. We were able to discharge the patient for further neurocardiac rehabilitation 
on 08.06.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 4 
Hospitalization from 12.04.2022 to 24.04.2022  
Euro score 2: 1.9% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The patient could be easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was 
always sufficient with low-dose oxygen via nasal cannula. The patient was moved to the 
ward on the first postoperative day in good general condition and hemodynamically stable. 
On the second postoperative day, there was a sudden occurrence of left homonymous 
hemianopsia and a markedly brachially accentuated left-sided motor hemisyndrome. The 
finger-to-nose test on the left was not possible. An immediate CT angiography was 
performed, revealing a new subacute demarcated infarct in the right posterior circulation 
area and a subacute lacunar infarct in the right precentral white matter. After consultation 
with the colleagues from neurology, the therapy with high-dose aspirin and atorvastatin was 
continued, and a systolic blood pressure of at least 120mmHg was maintained. The 
hemisyndrome showed significant improvement under occupational therapy with well-
preserved strength. However, the hemianopsia persisted. The ophthalmological examination 
confirmed a correlation with the ischemic event in the posterior circulation area. In the 
postoperative course, the patient developed atrial fibrillation. Under antiarrhythmic therapy 
with amiodarone, a highly bradycardic atrioventricular block was noted, up to short-term 
asystole. The patient was switched to external DDD pacing, and the antiarrhythmic therapy 
was stopped. Due to the persistence of the high-grade block, the indication for the 
implantation of a permanent pacemaker system was given, with subsequent implantation on 
the seventh postoperative day. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid 
retention and bilateral pleural effusions. Follow-up X-rays showed a significant right-sided 
pleural effusion, so a pleural puncture was performed. The patient was discharged for further 
cardiac rehabilitation on 24.04.2022.  



 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 5 
Hospitalization from 04.03.2020 to 12.03.2020  
Euro score 2: 1.6% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed a good intraoperative left ventricular pump 
function. Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient, with stable hemodynamics and 
without the need for catecholamines to the intensive care unit. The cardiac biomarkers 
increased within the expected range. The patient could be easily extubated on the day of 
surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient with low-dose oxygen 
insufflation through the nasal cannula. The hemodynamically stable patient was then 
transferred to the ward in good general condition. In the echocardiographic follow-up, a large 
pericardial effusion was noted with normal function of the implanted prosthesis, so that a 
subxiphoid pericardial drainage was performed. The drainage was removed the next day. 
Paroxysmal postoperative atrial fibrillation occurred in the ward, which could be converted to 
a sinus rhythm with the administration of amiodarone. The temporary pacemaker wires could 
be removed after a repeated ECG check and persistent sinus rhythm. The patient was 
discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 12.03.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 6 
Hospitalization from 26.04.2022 to 20.05.2022  
Euroscore 2: 3.8% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient could be 
easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always 
sufficient with low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. After extubation, the 
patient was alert, adequate, and without focal neurological deficits. Two hours later, there 
was a sudden onset of aphasia/dysarthria, as well as a sensorimotor hemisyndrome on the 
right (no response to pain stimulus, leg and arm paretic). An immediate CT angiography was 
performed, which showed an almost complete occlusion of the left common carotid artery 
with hypoperfusion of the entire left hemisphere. Further treatment involved stenting of the 
left internal carotid artery. Over time, the symptoms slightly regressed, although the arm 
paralysis persisted. The patient was transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition 
but hemodynamically stable. A persisting third-degree AV block led to the implantation of a 
permanent pacemaker. Postoperatively, the patient developed atrial fibrillation, which 
spontaneously converted to a sinus rhythm under beta-blockade. The external temporary 
pacemaker wires could be removed after a repeated ECG check and persistent sinus 
rhythm. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and bilateral 
pleural effusions. After intensive physiotherapeutic and occupational therapy, we were able 
to discharge the patient for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 20.05.2022. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 7 
Hospitalization from 11.09.2017 to 29.09.2017  
Euro score 2: 4.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed a normal intraoperative LVEF. Postoperative 



transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. Due to hemodynamic instability 
with increasing noradrenaline and fluid requirements, decreasing hematocrit, and bloody 
drainage fluid, a re-thoracotomy was performed. The separate report provides details about 
the course of this operation. The patient was oriented after extubation. However, there was a 
brachially accentuated left-sided hemiparesis with gaze palsy. Imaging revealed a high-
grade stenosis at the origin of the right internal carotid artery with right-hemispheric 
perfusion mismatch and multiple lacunar ischemias in the right middle cerebral artery 
territory, consistent with emboli from the proximal right internal carotid stenosis. After 
interdisciplinary consultation, a decision was made for stenting. Subsequently, the right 
internal carotid artery was stented with a good angiographic result. However, post-
interventionally a complete sensorimotor hemisyndrome on the left was observed. Under 
intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy, the hemi-symptoms slightly regressed, 
and the patient was eventually able to move the left hand and left foot with limitations. In the 
ward, the patient developed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. After the administration of beta-
blockers and electrolyte substitution, the patient spontaneously converted to a sinus rhythm. 
Prophylactically, we established oral anticoagulation therapy with Marcoumar for 3 months. 
Large-volume pleural effusions with compression atelectasis were evidenced, so bilateral 
pleural puncture was performed. The patient was discharged for further neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 29.09.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 8 
Hospitalization from 16.05.2023 to 24.05.2023  
Euroscore 2: 2.6% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. Due to persistently 
high catecholamine requirements and clinical and laboratory signs of a low-cardiac-output 
syndrome with rising lactate and oligo/anuria, computed tomography was performed 
revealing a large pericardial effusion with hematoma. A re-thoracotomy was performed to 
evacuate the pericardial hematoma and achieve hemostasis. Neurologically, after the 
reduction of sedation and during the wake-up attempt, the patient initially presented with 
slowed responses with a positive CAM-ICU indicative of a hypoactive delirium, which we 
treated with a non-pharmacological therapy regimen (quiet environment, orientation aids, 
mobilization, day-night rhythm). No focal neurological deficit could be detected. During the 
stay in the intensive care unit, the patient became increasingly alert, adequate, and pain-
free. The hemodynamically stable patient was transferred to the ward in good general 
condition. Postoperatively, a bradycardic rhythm was observed due to a high-degree AV 
block and chronotropic incompetence. Due to persisting rhythm disturbance a pacemaker 
was implanted on the fifth postoperative day. The postoperative computed tomography 
showed a regular postoperative finding with a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides, 
not warranting puncture. The patient was discharged to cardiac rehabilitation on 24.05.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 9 
Hospitalization from 24.05.2021 to 31.05.2021  
Euroscore 2: 2.5% 
 
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with DDD pacing set at 60/min. 
Subsequently, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable and despite the transfusion 
of 4 units of FFP and the substitution of 4 liters of crystalloids, continued to be persistently 
unstable and tachycardic. At the same time, due to the central venous pressure rising from 
12 to 21 mmHg, transesophageal echocardiography was performed, showing compression 



of the right ventricle due to a hematoma, necessitating an emergency re-thoracotomy in the 
intensive care unit with pericardial evacuation of the hematoma. No source of bleeding was 
found during the re-thoracotomy. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected 
range. The patient was extubated without problems and later transferred to the ward 
cardiorespiratory stable and in good general condition. The further course was otherwise 
uncomplicated. The patient was discharged home on the seventh postoperative day. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 10  
Hospitalization from 19.09.2015 to 09.10.2015  
Euroscore 2: 7.9% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the patient to the intensive care unit. Initially, during the wake-up 
attempt, the patient was oriented without focal neurological deficit and was subsequently 
extubated on the day of surgery. However, she showed a lack of adequate responsiveness, 
prompting a CT scan of the head, which revealed a parietal and a posterior CVI. Clinically, a 
right-sided hemiparesis and aphasia were revealed over time, which persisted with slight 
improvement until discharge. On the morning of the first postoperative day, increased bloody 
drainage losses and severe obstructive shock due to pericardial tamponade were observed. 
Consequently, an emergency re-thoracotomy was performed in the intensive care unit. The 
separate report provides details about the course of this operation. After transfer to the 
intensive care unit, the patient was in DDD pacing due to junctional rhythm. She further 
developed atrial fibrillation and severe bradycardia, so pacing via a temporary pacemaker 
electrode was necessary to prevent a low output syndrome. Due to the persistence of the 
rhythm issues, a PM implantation was performed. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat 
perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. A follow-up X-ray in the ward 
revealed a significant pleural effusion on the left chest, so a pleural puncture was performed. 
Subsequent X-ray controls showed no pneumothorax with a regressing amount of effusion. 
The further postoperative course was uneventful. After intensive physiotherapeutic and 
occupational therapy, we were able to discharge the patient for further neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 09.10.2015. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Patient 11 
Hospitalization from 15.09.2018 to 23.09.2018  
Euroscore 2: 1.3% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient, to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was easily 
extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient 
under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. On the first postoperative 
day, the patient developed hemodynamically significant AF, which was successfully 
cardioverted to sinus rhythm. The patient was transferred to the ward cardiorespiratory 
stable and in good general condition. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid 
retention and bilateral pleural effusions. In addition, a pleural puncture was performed on the 
left side on the fifth postoperative day. The patient was discharged for further cardiac 
rehabilitation on 23.09.2018. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 12 
Hospitalization from 12.11.2020 to 21.11.2020 
Euro score 2: 6.6% 



 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed a preserved intraoperative ejection fraction. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The patient was 
weaned and extubated without problems. He was subsequently transferred to the ward 
cardiopulmonary stable and in good general condition. In the follow-up echocardiography, a 
hemodynamically relevant pericardial effusion was detected with a circular extension, 
especially posteriorly and posterolaterally. The inferior vena cava was dilated and had 
limited respiratory variability. As a result, a subxiphoid pericardial drainage was performed. 
Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural 
effusions. Due to a large-volume pleural effusion, a pleural puncture was also performed on 
the right side. The patient was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 21.11.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 13  
Hospitalization from 07.03.2023 to 01.04.2023  
Euro score 2: 1.5% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The cardiac 
biomarkers increased within the expected range. During the repeated wake-up attempts, the 
patient was initially not interacting adequately, and there was a markedly reduced 
spontaneous movement of the right side of the body. After extubation, a right-sided, 
proximally accentuated arm and leg paresis, a right facial paresis with emphasis on the 
mouth, tongue deviation to the right, dysphagia, and visual neglect to the right became 
apparent. Native computed tomography scans revealed a CVI in the left centrum semiovale. 
Consequently, intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy led to slight neurological 
improvement during hospitalization. Despite discontinuation of all bradycardizing 
medications, a complete AV block persisted, and led to a pacemaker implantation on the 
tenth postoperative day. The patient was transferred to the ward in a decreased general 
condition but cardiopulmonary stable. On 21.03.2023, the patient reported a feeling of 
thoracic tightness and became hypotensive. A bedside echocardiography showed a 
significant pericardial effusion, so the symptomatic patient was urgently taken to the 
operating room for drainage of the pericardial effusion. Postoperatively, atrial fibrillation 
occurred intermittently on several occasions, which is why loading with amiodarone was 
initiated. Finally, a conversion to sinus rhythm could be achieved. The postoperative 
echocardiographic follow-up showed a normal cardiac finding. A simultaneous ultrasound 
check of both pleurae showed no pleural effusion warranting puncture. The patient was 
discharged for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 01.04.2023. 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 14 
Hospitalization from 20.06.2018 to 08.07.2018  
Euroscore 2: 2.7% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. Postoperatively, 
there was increased bleeding from the retrocardiac drainage along with a simultaneous rise 
in lactate levels. A transesophageal echocardiography was conducted, which showed a 
compressing hematoma over the right atrium. An emergency a re-thoracotomy was 
subsequently performed. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of 
this operation. After extubation, the patient suddenly developed a left-sided motor 
hemisyndrome (arm and leg holding test pathological, sinking of left arm and leg). An 
immediate CT angiography was performed, revealing a CVI with a new perfusion deficit on 
the right side with a high-grade stenosis of the middle cerebral artery. On the same day, an 



intervention with stenting of the right middle cerebral artery was performed. The 
hemisyndrome on the left arm improved over time, but persisted on the left leg. During the 
postoperative course, the patient developed a persisting third-degree AV block. On the 
seventh postoperative day, a pacemaker was implanted and the patient was subsequently 
transferred back to the department in a decreased general condition. The subsequent check 
showed proper function of the pacemaker. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat 
perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. The chest X-ray showed a small 
amount of pleural effusion on both sides, not warranting puncture. The patient was 
discharged for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 08.07.2018. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 15 
Hospitalization from 27.04.2018 to 23.05.2018  
Euroscore 2: 4.1% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. On the fifth postoperative day, there was an acute neurological deterioration with 
aphasia and right-sided hemisyndrome. A mechanical thrombectomy was performed after a 
CT scan of the head showed acute infarct in the left middle cerebral artery territory. This was 
followed by intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy. The neurological symptoms 
showed regression over time, although the right leg remained paretic. Postoperatively, there 
was a persistent second-degree with intermittent third-degree AV block, leading to the 
implantation of a pacemaker. Postoperatively, the patient developed intermittent atrial 
fibrillation which did not convert with medication, so on 18.05.2018, an electrical 
cardioversion was successfully performed. A pleural puncture was performed on the left side 
and intensive respiratory therapy with cautious negative fluid balance was initiated for a 
radiologically and sonographically confirmed pleural effusion. The patient was discharged for 
further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 23.05.2018.  
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 16 
Hospitalization from 17.04.2022 to 25.04.2022 
Euroscore 2: 3.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient could be 
easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always 
sufficient under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. Postoperatively, a 
third-degree AV block was diagnosed, which did not recover over the following days. A 
temporary pacemaker was placed via the femoral vein. On the fourth postoperative day, due 
to persistent bradycardia associated with the third-degree AV block, a permanent pacemaker 
was implanted. The patient was transferred to the ward cardiopulmonary stable and in good 
general condition. On the second postoperative day, there was a progressive oxygenation 
disorder. A chest X-ray showed new bilateral pleural effusions, sonographically 1000 ml on 
the left side and 100 - 200 ml on the right side. This was followed by a pleural puncture on 
the left with significant respiratory improvement. On the third postoperative day, atrial 
fibrillation occurred, which spontaneously converted to a sinus rhythm the next day after 
supplementation of potassium and magnesium to the high-normal range. Since extubation, 
the patient had persistent hoarseness and aphonia. The ENT colleagues observed a 
significantly reduced mobility of the left vocal cord during endoscopic examination, which is 
most likely due to recurrent nerve palsy from intraoperative injury. Regular training by 



speech therapy was conducted. The patient was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation 
on the eighth postoperative day. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 17 
Hospitalization from 08.05.2021 to 21.05.2021  
Euro score 2: 2.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient could be 
easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always 
sufficient under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. We were able to 
transfer the patient to the ward on the first postoperative day. Over time, a third-degree AV 
block was noted, leading to the implantation of a pecamaker on the fifth postoperative day. 
The postoperative check showed a perfectly functioning pecamaker. Following the removal 
of the external temporary pacemaker wires, a pericardial tamponade occurred. An 
emergency surgical evacuation of the pericardial tamponade was performed, followed by 
transfer to the intensive care unit. On the fifth postoperative day, there was an episode of 
self-limiting AFib. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and 
bilateral pleural effusions. In addition, a pleural puncture was performed on the left side 
following sonographic confirmation of a large-volume pleural effusion. The patient was 
discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 21.05.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 18 
Hospitalization from 06.08.2020 to 19.08.2020  
Euro score 2: 5.1% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed an intraoperative ejection fraction of 65%. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The cardiac 
biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was extubated on the day of 
surgery with subsequent smooth pulmonary adaptation. Neurologically, a postoperative 
hypo- to hyperactive delirium was noted, for which we started therapy with risperidone and 
had haloperidol in reserve. No signs of focal deficits or of a cerebrovascular incident were 
evident. The patient was transferred to the ward in a cardiopulmonary stable condition. On 
the evening of the transfer from the intensive care unit, the patient reported dyspnea and 
became increasingly respiratory insufficient. Due to radiological evidence of a large-volume 
pleural effusion, 1L of serous effusion was punctured from the left side. This was followed by 
a significant respiratory improvement of the patient. Postoperatively on the ward, there were 
repeated occurrences of extrasystoles up to ventricular bigeminy and intermittent atrial 
fibrillation, for which loading with amiodarone was started on the fourth postoperative day. 
The patient was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 19.08.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 19 
Hospitalization from 21.04.2015 to 10.05.2015  
Euro score 2: 6.9% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery. On the first postoperative day, 



the patient presented with neurological symptoms including left facio-brachio-crural 
hemiparesis, and left hemianopsia. A CT scan confirmed an ischemic stroke in the right 
posterior circulation area. The patient received intensive physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy for further treatment, and was subsequently transferred to the ward in a decreased 
general condition but cardiopulmonary stable, with slight improvement of neurological 
symptoms. Postoperatively, a third-degree AV block was documented, with a bradycardia up 
to 37/min. Due to the persistence of the third-degree AV block, a pacemaker implantation was 
performed on the seventh postoperative day. Postoperative cardiac CT scans showed open 
bypasses without evidence of pericardial effusion and with insignificant pleural effusion on 
both sides. The patient was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 10.05.2015.  
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 20 
Hospitalization from 04.04.2018 to 06.05.2018  
Euro score 2: 3.7% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. Due to increased 
bleeding from the chest drains and increased catecholamine requirements with progressive 
lactic acidosis, an echocardiography was performed, which showed a partly organized 
pericardial effusion compressing both the left and right ventricles. An emergency re-
thoracotomy was performed to evacuate the hematoma and pericardial blood. The patient 
was then extubated without any problems. On the first postoperative day during the morning 
rounds, a right brachiofacial hemisyndrome was evident. The cause was identified by CT as 
a CVI due to a thromboembolic occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery. Subsequently, 
due to progressive reduction in alertness and neurological symptoms, a thrombectomy with 
stent implantation was performed. Thereafter, an improvement in the motor function of the 
right arm was observed, although the paresis of the right leg persisted. The cardiopulmonary 
stable patient was transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition. In the 
postoperative ECGs, we observed a third-degree AV block with persistent bradycardia down 
to 35bpm, which led to the implantation of a pacemaker on the tenth postoperative day. After 
sonographical confirmation we performed the puncture of a right-sided pleural effusion. The 
subsequent X-ray control showed no pneumothorax. After intensive physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy, we were able to discharge the patient for further neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 06.05.2018.  
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 21 
Hospitalization from 16.10.2023 to 04.11.2023  
Euroscore 2: 7.2% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The patient was 
easily extubated shortly thereafter. During the neurological examination on the evening of 
the surgery, a gaze palsy to the right was observed, and subsequently a head CT was 
conducted. It revealed a stroke in the left posterior cerebral artery territory. The patient's 
neurological symptoms persisted but showed slight improvement over time. The patient was 
transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition but cardiopulmonary stable. Diuretic 
therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. A 
pleural puncture was performed on the left side due to a sonographically confirmed large-
volume pleural effusion. The further postoperative course was otherwise uncomplicated. We 
were able to discharge the patient for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 04.11.2023. 
 



-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 22 
Hospitalization from 30.06.2016 to 08.07.2016  
Euroscore 2: 2.2% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed a normal intraoperative ejection fraction. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was 
subsequently always sufficient under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. 
During the stay in the intensive care unit, the patient complained of weakness in the right hand, 
which clinically presented as a drop hand and pronounced weakness of both the flexors and 
extensors of the hand. The symptoms were explained as a result of a lower cervical plexus 
lesion and improved with intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy. The 
cardiopulmonary stable patient could be transferred to the ward in good general condition. 
The postoperative echocardiographic follow-up showed a normal cardiac finding and 
insignificant pleural effusions on both sides. The further postoperative course was uneventful. 
We were able to discharge the patient for further rehabilitation on the eighth postoperative 
day. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 23 
Hospitalization from 05.11.2022 to 23.11.2022  
Euroscore 2: 5.9 % 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. On the first postoperative evening, the patient exhibited a left sided hemiparesis and 
reported visual disturbances. A CT scan of the head revealed a CVI in the right frontoparietal 
and occipital areas. Over time, there was a slight improvement in the visual disturbances, 
but the left-sided hemiparesis persisted despite intensive physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy. On the morning of the first postoperative day, atrial fibrillation occurred, which could 
not be converted into sinus rhythm either with amiodarone or with electrical cardioversion. 
The atrial fibrillation converted to a sinus rhythm after two days of loading with amiodarone. 
During postoperative care, a complete AV block was observed without an intrinsic rhythm, 
leading to the implantation of a pacemker, which was performed on the third postoperative 
day. The patient was transferred to the regular ward in a decreased general condition but 
cardiopulmonary stable. On the morning of the fourth postoperative day, the temporary 
epicardial pacemaker wires were removed. Significant hypotension developed thereafter and 
echocardiographically we observed a hemodynamically relevant pericardial effusion over the 
right ventricle. Subsequently, a subxiphoid drainage of the pericardial effusion was urgently 
performed. In the postoperative chest X-ray, a small amount of pleural effusion was seen on 
both sides, which was treated with diuretics and negative fluid balance. The patient was 
discharged for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 23.11.2022.  
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 24 
Hospitalization from 30.06.2021 to 07.07.2021 
Euroscore 2: 2.7% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 



patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery and subsequently transferred to the 
regular ward cardiopulmonary stable and in good general condition on the next day. On the 
third postoperative day, the patient developed new-onset AF. After administration of a short 
infusion of amiodarone, he converted to a sinus rhythm. We began loading with oral 
amiodarone for rhythm control. The further course was uncomplicated. We were able to 
discharge the patient for further cardiac rehabilitation on 07.07.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 25 
Hospitalization from 11.04.2020 to 24.04.2020  
Euro score 2: 4.6% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. Over the course of the 
first postoperative day, the patient exhibited a left-sided hemiparesis. Computed tomography 
revealed extensive acute infarct areas in the posterior circulation territory on both sides, 
right-dominant, and an acute infarct area in the right middle cerebral artery territory. An 
intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy was initiated, with a slight improvement in 
the patient's neurological symptoms during hospitalization. The patient was easily extubated 
and subsequently transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition but 
cardiopulmonary stable. The pleural effusions that occurred during the postoperative course 
were treated with negative fluid balance and diuretic administration. Otherwise, the 
postoperative course was uncomplicated. We were able to discharge the patient for further 
cardiac rehabilitation on 24.04.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 26 
Hospitalization from 23.03.2018 to 19.04.2018  
Euro score 2: 7.1% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate 
surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Neurologically, there was 
a significantly delayed awakening. On the second postoperative day, a newly developed 
anisocoria was noted. An immediate computed tomography scan revealed several 
demarcating CVIs in the territories of the right posterior cerebral artery and right middle 
cerebral artery. The patient only slowly regained consciousness and exhibited a left sided 
hemisyndrome, which persisted until discharge. On the third postoperative day, there was 
increased bloody discharge from the chest drains and a drop in hemoglobin. Ultimately, an 
echocardiography revealed a tamponading pericardial hematoma, approximately 2.5 cm 
wide in front of the right heart chambers. Under these circumstances, there was an 
indication for hematoma evacuation and an emergency re-thoracotomy was performed. The 
separate surgical report provides details about the course of this operation. The patient was 
subsequently transferred to the ward on 10.04.2018. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat 
perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. A large-volume pleural effusion 
confirmed by sonography led to a pleural puncture on the left side. After intensive 
physiotherapy and occupational therapy with slight improvement in neurology, the patient 
was discharged to neurocardiac rehabilitation on 19.04.2018.  
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 27 
Hospitalization from 14.02.2015 to 22.02.2015  



Euro score 2: 5.6% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate 
surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The patient was extubated 
without any issues. On the evening of the first postoperative day, the patient developed a 
hyperactive delirium, which led us to start treatment with dexmedetomidine. Under this 
therapy, there was a rapid improvement until complete orientation the next day. The 
cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in good general condition. The 
patient experienced postoperative atrial fibrillation, which converted to a sinus rhythm with 
electrolyte supplementation. Under Enoxaparin and Marcoumar, a symptomatic pericardial 
effusion developed, leading to an emergency insertion of a subxiphoid pericardial drain on 
19.02.2015 due to the onset of tamponade. Follow-up chest X-ray revealed a pleural 
effusion on the right side, which led to a pleural puncture after sonographic confirmation. 
Subsequent X-ray controls showed no pneumothorax with a regressing amount of effusion. 
The further course was uneventful. We were able to discharge the patient for further 
rehabilitation on 22.02.2015. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 28 
Hospitalization from 13.08.2023 to 30.08.2023  
Euroscore 2: 6.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. After successful 
pulmonary weaning, the patient was extubated on the day of surgery. On the morning of the 
following day, increased bloody drainage and an obstructive shock due to pericardial 
tamponade were observed. Due to acute circulatory failure with increasing catecholamine 
support, an emergency re-thoracotomy was performed in the intensive care unit. The 
separate surgical report provides details about this operative course. On the second 
postoperative day, the patient was aphasic with right-sided hemiparesis. A CT scan revealed 
two acute cortical ischemias in the left superior frontal gyrus and insular left. Clinically, the 
right-sided hemiplegia and motor aphasia persisted. The patient was transferred to the ward 
in a decreased general condition but cardiopulmonary stable. Postoperatively, however, the 
patient developed persistent cardiac arrhythmias with a third-degree AV block. There was 
also intermittent atial filbrillation, which could not be treated with beta-blockade due to the 
high-degree AV block. Due to the persistence of the above rhythm problems, a pecamaker 
implantation was performed on the 9th postoperative day to enable beta-blockade and atial 
filbrillation treatment. Follow-up chest X-rays showed voluminous pleural effusions on both 
sides, so bilateral pleural punctures were performed. The final X-ray checks showed no 
pneumothorax. After intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy with subsequent 
slight neurological improvement, the patient was discharged for further neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 30.08.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 29 
Hospitalization from 03.05.2017 to 10.05.2017  
Euro score 2: 5.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The patient was extubated without any problems on the day of surgery. During the 
postoperative course in the intensive care unit, a third-degree AV block persisted with no 
ventricular escape rhythm, and subsequently a permanent pacemaker was implanted on the 



fourth postoperative day. The cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in 
good general condition. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and 
bilateral pleural effusions. On the fifth postoperative day, a right-sided pleural puncture was 
performed upon detection of a large pleural effusion in the pleural sonography. The further 
postoperative course was uncomplicated, and we were able to discharge the patient for 
cardiac rehabilitation on 10.05.2017. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 30 
Hospitalization from 06.01.2017 to 15.01.2017  
Euro score 2: 7.5% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Postoperative 
transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The cardiopulmonary stable patient 
was extubated without any problems on the evening of the surgery and was transferred to the 
ward in good general condition. In the postoperative follow-up echocardiography, a circular 
pericardial effusion with a maximum diameter of 2.5 cm was observed, exerting pressure on 
the right ventricle, necessitating a subxiphoid relief of the pericardial effusion on the fifth 
postoperative day. Due to a third-degree AV block with accompanying bradycardia, a PM was 
implanted on the seventh postoperative day. Follow-up chest X-ray showed good placement 
of the PM leads without pneumothorax and with good PM function. The patient was discharged 
for further cardiac rehabilitation on 15.01.2017. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 31 
Hospitalization from 18.04.2022 to 26.04.2022  
Euroscore 2: 3.6% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed an intraoperative ejection fraction of 65%. 
Postoperative transfer of the hemodynamically stable, intubated patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was easily 
extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient 
under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. The patient was then 
transferred to the ward in good general condition. On the evening of the transfer to the ward, 
the patient experienced a drop in blood pressure to 60 mmHg systolic with newly onset AFib, 
and was immediately moved to the emergency room for electrical cardioversion. This was 
followed by conversion to a sinus rhythm, after which the now stable patient was once again 
transferred to the ward. Due to persistent pain in the arm with a tense and hardened forearm 
and newly developed sensory disturbances in the left hand, a revision of the former radial 
artery harvest site was performed using regional anesthesia of the brachial plexus. We also 
began medication with pregabalin alongside occupational therapy exercises for the arm. The 
hospital stay was otherwise uncomplicated. We were able to discharge the patient for further 
cardiac rehabilitation on 26.04.2022. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 32 
Hospitalization from 20.10.2016 to 28.10.2016 
Euro score 2: 2.8% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. After 



extubation, the patient was oriented, and without focal neurological deficits. However, he was 
hoarse, so that the otorhinolaryngology colleagues were consulted, attributing the hoarseness 
to a temporary unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy postoperatively. The 
cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in good general condition on the 
first postoperative day. On the second postoperative day, the patient experienced a syncope, 
which prompted the start of telemetry monitoring. Telemetry revealed episodes of third-degree 
AV block with pauses up to 7 seconds, leading to a PM implantation on the sixth postoperative 
day. The patient was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 28.10.2016. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 33 
Hospitalization from 01.02.2021 to 25.02.2021  
Euroscore 2: 7.4% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. On the first 
postoperative day, there was a prolonged awakening reaction with lack of movement in the 
left arm and leg, while the right arm and leg had normal movement upon request. An 
emergency computed tomography of the head showed a fresh, likely embolic closure of the 
superior branch of the right M2 artery with an acute demarcated infarct area in the right 
inferior frontal gyrus, frontal operculum, and posterior insular region. Due to a mismatch with 
a larger penumbra frontally and parietally, an interventional thrombectomy was performed. 
This was followed by slight neurological improvement with intensive physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy. The patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas 
exchange was subsequently always sufficient under low-dose oxygen insufflation through 
the nasal cannula. The cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in good 
general condition. Postoperatively, there was a persistent third-degree AV block with 
episodes of pronounced bradycardia, leading to the implantation of a pacemker on the 11th 
postoperative day. Postoperative checks showed good pacemker function with good 
electrode placement on the X-ray. In the postoperative computed tomography, a 
hemorrhagic pericardial effusion with a maximum width of 27 mm over the right atrium was 
observed. An echocardiographic check confirmed a hemodynamically significant pericardial 
effusion, which led to a surgical subxiphoid drainage being performed in the beginning 
symptomatic patient. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and 
bilateral pleural effusions. On the fifth postoperative day, a right-sided pleural puncture was 
performed upon detection of a large pleural effusion in the pleural sonography. After 
intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy with slight improvement in neurological 
symptoms, the patient was discharged for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 25.02.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 34 
Hospitalization from 20.04.2015 to 30.04.2015  
Euro score 2: 5.1% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate surgical 
report provides information about the course of the operation. The cardiopulmonary stable 
patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery and was transferred to the ward in good 
general condition on the first postoperative day. On the fourth postoperative day, the patient 
developed atrial fribillation, which could not be converted electrically despite electrolyte 
substitution and loading with amiodarone. The patient subjectively experienced this as 
significantly disturbing due to low blood pressure values. Consequently, a follow-up 
echocardiography was conducted for further evaluation. This revealed a large pericardial 
effusion, which was hemodynamically significant over the area of the right atrium. Therefore, 



a subxiphoid pericardial drainage of approximately 500ml of old blood effusion was performed. 
In the ward, a persistent third-degree AV block with bradycardia was noted, leading to the 
implantation of a pacemaker on the eighth postoperative day. The postoperative check 
showed good pacemaker function. Radiologically, a new elevation of the left diaphragm was 
detected postoperatively. Sonographic examination showed limited, but not paradoxical, 
mobility of the left diaphragm. The findings were interpreted in the context of phrenic nerve 
paralysis. The patient was respiratory always compensated. Follow-up chest X-ray revealed 
small bilateral pleural effusions and diuretic therapy was initiated as a treatment. The patient 
was discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 30.04.2015. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 35 
Hospitalization from 22.07.2023 to 29.07.2023  
Euroscore 2: 7.4% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery. On the first postoperative day during the 
morning rounds, a right brachiofacial hemisyndrome was evident. Since there was no 
perfusion deficit on the CT scan of the head and the symptoms completely regressed over 
time, we considered a periinterventional CVI as the most likely cause. Subsequently, the 
symptoms completely regressed. The patient was transferred to the ward in good general 
condition. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and bilateral 
pleural effusions, and a pleural puncture was performed due to a sonographically detectable 
significant pleural effusion on the left. The further course was uncomplicated. We were able 
to discharge the patient for further cardiac rehabilitation on 29.07.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 36 
Hospitalization from 31.01.2017 to 09.02.2017  
Euro score 2: 1.8% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The patient was extubated without any problems on the day of surgery. The patient 
arrived at the intensive care unit with DDD pacing and no intrinsic rhythm. Since no intrinsic 
rhythm could be detected even on the second postoperative day, a permanent PM was 
implanted on the same day. The patient was transferred to the ward cardiopulmonary stable 
and in good general condition. A persistent decrease in sensitivity in digits I-III on the right 
side, without motor deficits, was reported postoperatively. After evaluation by the neurologists 
in the hospital, the sensory losses could most likely be clinically associated with a distal lesion 
of the median nerve. Due to fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions during the 
postoperative course, a diuretic therapy was administered under control and substitution of 
electrolytes. Otherwise, the hospital stay was uncomplicated. We were able to discharge the 
patient home on 09.02.2017. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 37 
Hospitalization from 10.12.2023 to 19.12.2023  
Euroscore 2: 2.9% 
 



Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate surgical 
report provides details about the course of the operation. The cardiac biomarkers increased 
within the expected range. The patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery. On the first 
postoperative day, the cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in good 
general condition. On the third postoperative day, the patient experienced new-onset 
hemodynamically significant AF, prompting an electrical cardioversion on the same day. 
Subsequently, sinus rhythm persisted until discharge. The postoperative cardiac CT showed 
properly contrasted bypasses. Incidentally, a large pleural effusion was noted on the right side, 
which was successfully punctured. The patient was discharged for further cardiac 
rehabilitation on 19.12.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 38 
Hospitalization from 05.04.2021 to 14.04.2021  
Euroscore 2: 1.1% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed an intraoperative ejection fraction of 65%. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was easily 
extubated on the day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient 
under low-dose oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. On the first postoperative day, 
the patient was transferred to the ward in good general condition. The hospital stay was overall 
uncomplicated. We were able to discharge the patient for further cardiac rehabilitation on 
14.04.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 39 
Hospitalization from 02.02.2023 to 10.02.2023  
Euro score 2: 1.4% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The 
cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in good general condition. On the 
fourth postoperative day, new onset atial filbrillation was treated initially with beta-blockade, 
followed by an electrical cardioversion to sinus rhythm on the following day. A 
hemodynamically significant pericardial effusion with a maximum width of 2 cm over the right 
ventricle was diagnosed during a postoperative echocardiographic check and a subxiphoidal 
pericardial drain was carried out on the fifth postoperative day. The postoperative cardiac CT 
scan showed proper contrast of all bypasses and only a small, insignificant amount of pleural 
effusion bilaterally. The patient was discharged home on 10.02.2023. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 40 
Hospitalization from 06.02.2017 to 24.02.2017  
Euro score 2: 1.8% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Upon 
cessation of sedation, motor weakness on the left side of the body, particularly of the arm, as 
well as motor aphasia, were observed. A head CT scan ruled out bleeding, showing a small 
area with a blurred cortex-medulla boundary as a correlate of the symptoms. Persistent clinical 



findings led to a follow-up CT the next day, which showed a hypodensity measuring 
approximately 2cm frontoparietal right in the white matter. Due to sudden apathy on the 
second postoperative day with lack of responsiveness, a new computed tomography showed 
an unchanged finding. Brain protective measures were initiated. Due to strong blood pressure 
fluctuations, treatment was phased between norepinephrine and urapidil via perfusor; both 
could be stopped later on. The cardiopulmonary stable patient was transferred to the ward in 
decreased general condition. On the seventh postoperative day, the temporary pacemaker 
leads were removed. The patient was hypotensive in the afternoon. An echocardiographic 
examination revealed a hemodynamically significant pericardial effusion, prompting an 
emergency subxiphoidal relief of the pericardial effusion. Diuretic therapy was initiated to treat 
perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. Additionally, the patient underwent 
pleural punctures on both sides for significant effusions in the ward. The patient was 
discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on 24.02.2017. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 41 
Hospitalization from 07.11.2017 to 25.11.2017  
Euroscore 2: 5.2% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Postoperative 
transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care unit. Soon after 
transfer to the intensive care unit, the patient exhibited a left hemiplegia, prompting a 
computed tomography scan of the head. This revealed cortical and subcortical ischemic CVIs 
throughout the right hemisphere, as well as in the left precentral gyrus and left cerebellum. 
Intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy were initiated, followed by slight clinical 
improvement. The patient was transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition but 
cardiopulmonary stable. In the postoperative course, there were episodes of atrial fibrillation 
followed by pronounced bradycardia, indicative of a bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome. On 
the night of the sixth postoperative day, there were high-grade blocks and pauses up to 7 
seconds without antiarrhythmic therapy. Consequently, a permanent PM was implanted on 
the eighth postoperative day. After intensive physiotherapy and occupational therapy with 
slight improvement in the neurological condition of the patient, discharge to neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 25.11.2017. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 42 
Hospitalization from 18.01.2020 to 28.01.2020  
Euroscore 2: 3.9% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Postoperative 
transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care unit. The 
cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. Upon awakening, a right hemiparesis 
was noted. A CT scan of the head showed no evidence of ischemia. The symptoms completely 
regressed over time, suggesting a transient cerebrovascular insult. The patient was 
transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition but cardiopulmonary stable. 
Postoperatively, the patient was consistently pecamaker-dependent due to a third-degree AV 
block, which led to the implantation of a pecamaker on the eighth postoperative day. Despite 
negative fluid balance, there were still large-volume pleural effusions on both sides, so bilateral 
pleural punctures were performed. Subsequent radiological checks showed a good outcome 
with significant regression of the pleural effusions. The patient was discharged for further 
cardiac rehabilitation on 28.01.2020. 
 
-------------------------------------- 



 
Patient 43 
Hospitalization from 19.07.2019 to 26.07.2019  
Euro score 2: 2.7% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
transesophageal echocardiography showed an intraoperative ejection fraction of 65%. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The patient was 
extubated without any issues on the evening of the surgery and was transferred to the ward 
in good general condition on the next day. A single postoperative episode of atial filbrillation 
was terminated by electrolyte substitution and escalation of beta-blockade. Follow-up chest 
X-rays revealed a pleural effusion on the right side, leading to a pleural puncture. Subsequent 
X-ray checks showed no pneumothorax with a regressing amount of effusion. The further 
hospital stay was uneventful. The patient was discharged home on 26.07.2019. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 44  
Hospitalization from 23.02.2015 to 22.03.2015  
Euro score 2: 2.9% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate 
surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. Due to increasing bloody 
output from the pericardial and retrosternal drains, increasing catecholamine requirement, 
lactate rise, tachycardia, and decreased cardiac output, an echocardiography was 
performed, which showed a circumferential tamponading hematoma, necessitating a re-
thoracotomy. The separate report provides details about this surgical course. Due to 
reduced alertness after cessation of sedation, the patient could only be extubated with delay 
on the eighth postoperative day. Clinically, a new right-sided hemi-syndrome with motor 
aphasia were observed. A computed tomography of the head correspondingly found an 
acute ischemic CVI in the left frontal-parietal area. Intensive physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy were conducted, although an arm-emphasized hemiparesis persisted over time. The 
patient was transferred to the ward cardiopulmonary stable and in good general condition. 
Postoperative chest X-ray showed little pleural effusion bilaterally, which was treated with 
negative fluid balance and diuretic administration. After intensive physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy with slight improvement in neurological symptoms, the patient was 
discharged for further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 22.03.2015. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 45 
Hospitalization from 03.11.2018 to 13.11.2018  
Euroscore 2: 3.3% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. Laboratory findings 
on the first postoperative day showed a drop in central venous oxygen saturation and a livid 
discoloration of both lower extremities indicating malperfusion. The patient had an increasing 
need for catecholamines, so that a transesophageal echocardiography was performed. This 
revealed an organized hematoma in front of the right ventricle, and an emergency re-
thoracotomy was performed. The patient was easily extubated on the second postoperative 
day, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient under low-dose oxygen 
insufflation through the nasal cannula. The cardiopulmonary stable patient was then 
transferred to the ward in good general condition. On the fifth postoperative day, the patient 
reported a newly developed visual impairment. A computed tomographic examination of the 



head revealed an ischemic CVI in the left occipital area. The complaints regressed over the 
course of the hospitalization. Postoperatively, the patient developed Afib, which converted to 
a sinus rhythm under beta-blockade. The patient was discharged for further cardiac 
rehabilitation on 13.11.2018. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 46 
Hospitalization from 09.02.2019 to 18.02.2019  
Euro score 2: 4.1% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The separate 
surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. The patient was easily 
extubated on the evening of the surgery. The patient was transferred to the ward on the 
second postoperative day in a decreased general state. Due to insufficient intrinsic rhythm, a 
pacemaker was implanted on the fifth postoperative day. On the sixth postoperative day, the 
temporary epicardial pacemaker wires were removed. Shortly afterwards, the patient was 
hemodynamically unstable. A transthoracic echocardiography revealed a hemodynamically 
significant pericardial effusion, necessitating an emergency subxiphoidal pericardial 
drainage. The postoperative echocardiographic check showed a normal cardiac finding. 
Incidentally, a large right-sided pleural effusion was detected, which was punctured. The 
final radiological control showed a good result without pneumothorax or residual effusion. 
Because of sensory disturbance on the right lower leg and the sole of the foot, a neurological 
consultation was carried out. Clinically, there was suspicion of a peripheral origin of the 
sensory disturbance due to the venous harvesting. Sonography showed no hematoma of the 
left lower leg. To complete the diagnostics, an MRI of the head was performed, which 
showed no pathological findings. The sensory disturbance is most likely associated with a 
peripheral nerve injury during vein harvesting. Otherwise, the course was uncomplicated. 
We were able to discharge the patient for further cardiac rehabilitation on 18.02.2019. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 47 
Hospitalization from 03.07.2020 to 10.07.2020  
Euroscore 2: 1.7% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The cardiac 
biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was easily extubated on the 
day of surgery, and the gas exchange was subsequently always sufficient under low-dose 
oxygen insufflation through the nasal cannula. The cardiopulmonary stable patient was 
transferred to the ward in good general condition on the first postoperative day without any 
issues. Postoperatively, no intrinsic rhythm was observed due to a third-degree AV block, so 
a PM implantation was carried out on the third postoperative day. The hospital stay was 
otherwise uncomplicated, and we were able to discharge the patient for further cardiac 
rehabilitation on the seventh postoperative day. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 48 
Hospitalization from 26.07.2021 to 07.08.2021  
Euroscore 2: 7.2% 
 
The separate surgical report provides information about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 



unit. The patient was easily extubated on the day of surgery. On the first postoperative day, a 
right hemiplegia and right facial paralysis were noted. An emergency CT scan of the head 
revealed a CVI due to acute closure of the left middle cerebral artery in the M1 segment with 
delayed perfusion in the entire middle cerebral artery territory. An interventional thrombectomy 
was performed, followed by a slight improvement in the hemiplegia, which persisted especially 
in the leg area. The patient was transferred to the ward in a decreased general condition but 
cardiopulmonary stable. Postoperatively, the patient presented with atrial fribillation and 
supraventricular tachycardias, alternating with bradycardia up to a frequency of 30/min, 
indicative of a tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome. On the 6th postoperative day, due to 
persistent rhythm disturbances, a pacemaker implantation was carried out. Diuretic therapy 
was initiated to treat perioperative fluid retention and bilateral pleural effusions. Despite 
negative fluid balance, persistent dyspnea occurred. Following the sonographic detection of a 
large-volume pleural effusion on the right, a pleural puncture was performed, resulting in a 
significant clinical improvement of the patient. After intensive physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy with slight improvement in neurological symptoms, the patient was discharged for 
further neurocardiac rehabilitation on 07.08.2021. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 49 
Hospitalization from 30.01.2019 to 07.02.2019  
Euroscore 2: 2.8% 
 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated, hemodynamically stable patient to the intensive care 
unit. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. The 
cardiac biomarkers increased within the expected range. The patient was easily extubated on 
the day of surgery and was transferred to the ward cardiopulmonary stable and in good 
general condition on the first postoperative day. On the fourth postoperative day, the patient 
developed atrial fribillation, which converted to a sinus rhythm with beta-blockade. The 
external temporary pacemaker wires could be removed after a repeat ECG control and 
persistent sinus rhythm. Due to postoperative hoarseness, consultants from the 
otorhinolaryngology department were involved. A complete paralysis of the left vocal cord with 
insufficient glottal closure was observed, most likely due to an intraoperative injury to the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve. The hospital stay was otherwise uneventful, and the patient was 
discharged for further cardiac rehabilitation on the eighth postoperative day. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Patient 50 
Hospitalization from 23.11.2023 to 21.12.2023  
Euro score 2: 1.4% 
 
The separate surgical report provides details about the course of the operation. 
Postoperative transfer of the intubated patient to the intensive care unit. The patient was 
easily extubated on the day of surgery. After extubation, a complete left-sided hemiparesis 
was observed. A CT scan revealed a demarcated ischemia in the right parietal area. 
Supportive brain-protective treatment was provided, along with intensive physiotherapy and 
occupational therapy for the patient. The neurological symptoms showed slight regression 
but persistent left-sided paresis especially of the leg. The patient was transferred to the ward 
in a decreased general condition but cardiopulmonary stable. During the postoperative 
echocardiographic check-up, a tamponading pericardial effusion over the lateral wall of the 
left ventricle with a maximum diameter of 2.5 cm was noted, necessitating a subxiphoid 
pericardial drainage. The separate surgical report provides details about the course of this 
operation. Postoperatively, a third-degree AV block occurred, with pronounced bradycardia 
and a very low ventricular escape rhythm of 20bpm. Consequently, a permanent pacemker 



was implanted. Bilateral pleural punctures were performed following radiological and 
sonographic confirmation of significant pleural effusions. Additionally, diuretic therapy was 
initiated to achieve a negative fluid balance. The final X-ray checks showed a normal finding 
without pneumothorax or pleural effusions. We continued physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy treatment during the hospitalization. The patient was discharged to neurocardiac 
rehabilitation on 21.12.2023. 